hundreds of thousands of Palestinians in
Gaza are living under the NeverEnding
threat of famine because of the shortage
of humanitarian Aid is the starvation of
civilians being used by Israel as a
weapon of War this is Inside
[Music]
Story
hello welcome to the program I am Hashim
the United Nations is warning that
hundreds of thousands of people in Gaza
are on the brink of Salvation acute
levels of hunger are facing around 2
million Palestinians after many of them
lost their homes and livelihoods
desperate people unable to feed
themselves or their children are living
in family like conditions some resorting
to eating animal feed and weeds to
survive is a strangling of food medicine
and other humanitarian supplies being
used as a weapon of War by the Israeli
government will be discussing all this
and more with our guests shortly but
first malabi MPI reports on the
widespread suffering with no end
inight surrounded by the ruins of what
used to be their homes omj is among the
estimated 300,000 Palestinians who
stayed in the isolated area of Northern
Gaza people have not been receiving
deliveries of food because International
a trucks are being denied access to the
areas in need some residents in jabalia
say they have faced prolonged periods
without food or access to water to
survive they've resorted to picking
weeds to cook for their children and
turning animal feed into
flower as you can see our conditions are
difficult everything is closed here and
there is danger all around us when
collecting the weeds but we have no
other choice but to ensure that the
children receive Food in any way
possible so they don't have to endure
hunger we come to this m to grind Bley
and corn and everything that can be
ground even animal feed we are forced to
eat everything because of hunger we ask
the Arab countries and all other
countries of the world to secure the
entry of Aid to our people who have no
help as you can see this is animal
foda an estimated 580,000 Palestinians
in Gaza are facing catastrophic levels
of hunger the world food program is
warning that there's acute shortages in
Northern Gaza unless we get significant
volumes on a regular basis to people in
the most food insecure areas of Gaza
that we would have famine conditions in
place by May or June of this year we are
not getting significant amounts of Aid
in we are not doing it every day as we
need to do since the St start of
Israel's war convoys of humanitarian Aid
have been delayed denied permits and
sometimes attacked Israeli soldiers
screen everything and seize items deemed
useful to Hamas more recently a group of
Israeli protesters demanding the release
of captives set up bobbed wire at the
Karam Shalom border crossing to stop
trucks entering Gaza I cannot understand
why a country at war is bringing
humanitarian Aid into its over Enemy
Lines um and fueling the war every truck
that goes in is another day of War for
both sides Israel's bombardment of
Southern Gaza is forcing more than 2
million displaced people to head back
North in search of
shelter pressuring many into making a
choice of potentially dying from Hunger
in the North or being killed by Israeli
bombing in the
South Mal Al jaer for Inside
Story Han Mahmud sent us this report
from Rafa where man Palestinians are
struggling to secure
food since the beginning of this
genocidal war on Gaza living conditions
have become increasingly difficult for
people here overcrowded RAF where there
is a real struggle for food and water
and almost a famine taking place in the
northern part of Gaza this is the daily
normal defin by displacement Terror and
hunger where the vast majority of this
place families forced out of their homes
from the north and more recently from
the central area and the City of KH Unis
are now hungry with little Financial
capabilities as depletion of basic
necessities and Food Supplies an ongoing
blockade on humanitarian Aid causing
prices to double and triple for some
good the unusual scene of people queuing
in line in line for a ball of soup uh it
just become uh or has become the uh
major feature of people living in rafah
City since the beginning of the war Han
Mahmud for The Insider story Al jazer in
southern
Gaza let's bring in our guests in our
studio in London Omar ABD Manan is
pediatric neurologist who who founded
the doctor's help group called health
workers of Palestine from Rafa in Gaza
Fidel alaj is a food security and
livelihood coordinator at Oxfam also in
London to Nel arova his senior crisis
response advisor at Amnesty
International welcome to the program let
me start with f you are in RAF where
people are struggling on a daily basis
to secure food for themselves for their
loved ones for their
children give us a sense of what is
happening
particularly in the Central and northern
part of Gaza where many say that's where
we have the biggest humanitarian
crisis actually um as you said it's not
only about RAF it's uh all across Gaza
STP uh you have the whole population of
over 2 million people at imminent risk
of femine uh the numbers say that more
than 300 70 uh thousand of these people
are at the huge risk uh immediate risk
of starvation with exhaustive uh where
they have exhausted their coping
mechanisms also so they are about to die
from hunger uh this is how it looks like
in Gaza now more specifically in the
North and the center parts of Gaza with
a huge U no access of food Aid or any
food items uh to that to those parts
people are suffering they are looking
for essential goods for any kind of food
commodities with no luck to find them at
all uh here in ra the the situation is
worsening as well uh with the cut of the
entering of the a trucks and with the
scarcity of the food um Commodities to
start with before all of this even
started Donatella what what is the
biggest obstacle to the steady flow of
Aid into Gaza is it logistical is it the
long security screening of the material
or is it simply a politically motivated
thing it is beyond doubt that um there
is a lack of political will um obviously
from the Israeli authorities they are
the occupying power and they are the
ones who control access to the Gaza
Strip and they are the ones that have
been restricting the entry of both
humanitarian Aid and Commercial imports
not just from the 7th of October but um
for the past 16 years um that is in
itself a breach of international
humanitarian law um Israel has not been
complying with its
obligation just to be very very clear uh
if there is a need for humanitarian Aid
in Gaza is because Israel as the
occupying power has not been fulfilling
its
obligation um it's not the duty of The
Intern National Community to provide
food water Medical Care education all
that the population under occupation
needs that is the duty and the
obligation of the occupying power not
only Israel has not been doing that but
it has constantly restricted the entry
of humanitarian Aid of imports of
medicines of of absolutely everything
that this civilian population requires
um for you you know the essential needs
of daily life now since the 7th of
October that level of restriction has
increased exponentially and in addition
the wholesale destruction including the
deliberate destructions of Road uh want
on destruction not required by military
necessity uh that kind of Destruction is
also creating logistical problem because
especially now that people are escaping
uh Rafa and moving towards the middle
area of Gaza hoping to find safety even
though you know that's obviously not uh
not going you know that that's not
possible at the moment but that means
that people are going to an area where
there is nothing and where getting the
aid from the southern border of Gaza to
theera is going to be even more
difficult because of the state of the
roads as a result of the Israeli
military operation
okay okay Omar you must be in touch with
the Medics on the ground how are
children coping with this horrible
situation unfolding in
Gaza thank you Hashim I think the
reality is uh no one is coping with the
situation in Gaza because as we have
seen time and time again the Israeli
occupation forces determined to bomb and
Target hospitals and Healthcare facil
ities what that means is the acute
starvation that many of these children
are being exposed to and let us not
forget there are cases of marasmus and
quashi cor coming into hospitals in
Gazza which is the uh immediate effect
of acute malnutrition things that we saw
in somal land or Somalia in the '90s but
we are now seeing in Gazza in
2024 on top of that you have targeting
Healthcare facilities which means these
same children that are starving and are
you know at risk of uh long-term
negative Health seally are not able to
gain access to care to renutrition to
the right um you know treatment for that
and you know only yesterday I was
talking to colleagues within the NASA
medical hos Hospital complex and we saw
children being shot at killed by snipers
inside the hospitals from Israeli drones
and quad drops with machine guns on them
so you know the reality is it's all well
and good talking about malnutrition and
lack of aid but the real root cause is
currently that there is an ongoing
bombing bombardment uh continue attacks
on hospitals destroying and decimating
any sort of healthc care facility that
could actually salvage some of these
children and this is 100% man-made this
is created by the Israeli state by the
Israeli occupation forces and it's been
compounded by the Egyptians not allowing
Aid in as well and closing up the
borders at Rafa we have to remember that
this is multi-prong there are numerous
agents at play here and whilst the
Israelis are the perpetrators they are
being egged on by the UK the US and some
of the Arab countries
unfortunately Fida if you were to give
us a list of the top priorities for the
people of Gaza in terms of humanitarian
Aid what would be the main material that
you would like to see coming to Gaza
now um actually it's um it's a lots it's
a backage of priorities let's say
because after all of this time of um
stopping all kinds of Aid to enter Then
the priorities are accumulating if you
want but the first and foremost priority
is food people need to eat people need
to drink people need to eat something
beyond the canned food that's trickling
in through the aid trucks people need
fresh vegetables fresh fruits um eggs
poultry things that that um have a
nutritional um nutritional value to it
not just to uh save their hunger so the
the quality of the food to enter Gaza is
an essential um and of course the
priority is of more and more and more
quantities of food to enter Gaza because
the need is huge and the need is unmet
and for people on the verge of a
starvation of a famine so it's very
essential how much food enters not only
what food that does enter uh plus there
is a need for clean drinking water for
medication if you want because of the
nutritional um um problems caused by the
lack of food we Face uh so many diseases
so many Health uh complications that
need treatment as well they will not be
treated by food entry alone so this and
combined with the fuel U the cooking gas
um equipment to be used also to cook the
food because when you look in the ground
um you don't find anything like there is
no setup or there's a very we are
reduced to a very primitive setup of
making food actually so it's not enough
to get um the materials or the
ingredients to make a meal it's
important to provide everything that you
need to make an actual meal and put it
uh in front of a family or starving kid
Donella human rights groups have been
accusing Israel of using starvation as a
method of War what can be done now in
terms of international humanitarian law
to stop this practice from continuing
for the upcoming days and
weeks um I mean the legal tools are
there um Israel's obligations are
absolutely clear what is required this
political will at the level of the
International Community First of all for
for those countries and and United
States is obviously the key one but
there are others too uh that are
providing weapons to Israel um that
allow the continuous bombardment of
civilians and civilian infrastructures
the weapons that are fueling the
conflict so you know those weapon
Imports should be stopped at once
because there is ample evidence that
they're being used in a manner that
contrin International humanitarian law
secondly again the those that are that
have the influence on uh on the Israeli
authorities need to put pressure to
force Israel to comply with with its
obligation to allow both humanitarian
Aid and uh Imports into Gaza to stop
targeting food production um um places
such as uh uh Fields where uh food is
being grown factories where food is
being processed uh uh bakeries all the
civilian infrastructure that has been a
target from day one from the 7th of
October but also from long before uh the
population of Gaza was already in a in a
very very dire humanitarian situation
before the 7th of October and so the
rate at which the situation has
deteriorated is all the greater and
there is only
uh one thing you know there is only
really one side that can change this
equation and that is for Israel to be
forced to comply with its obligation uh
by its International allies that are
providing it with um economic military
and political support because clearly
the Israeli authorities have shown that
they are not um complying with
international law and that they are
violating international law on a daily
BAS basis Omar you touched on the
children malnutrition we're talking
about more than a million people are
stuck or stranded in the southern part
of the of Raa living in uh tents with
the risk of more disease spreading do
you have any concerns that if there's no
intervention in the upcoming days the
situation could just further degenerate
and become and spin out of
control absolutely like I said we are
seeing already the acute effects of U
malnutrition of children having to eat
animal feed in the north and middle of
Gaza um this is you know these are
deplorable conditions but they have been
uh you know created by the Israeli
States now the other thing to note and
this is a really important Point people
do not die from starvation instantly
people when they are starved and
stressed at long periods of time
especially children under the age of two
um they end up having essentially immuno
compromise their immune system is
compromised they are at much greater
risk RK of dying from dial illnesses
like chora which for sure is spreading
in Gaza even if we cannot test for it uh
they die from hepatitis they die from
pneumonia chest infections there simple
illnesses that should be preventable and
should not lead to death become lethal
in these conditions so the excess
mortality rates which I suspect will
number in the hundreds of thousands when
the dust settles if the dust settles
then I think this is where my great my
gravest concern as a pediatrician is and
also it's important to know any child
who under the age of two goes through
this period of acute malnutrition
whether it's as a fetus or as a child
they are essentially Limited in terms of
their long-term Health outcomes these
children will have lasting final impacts
on their cardiovascular health on their
risk of cancer on their risk of you know
their ability to grow this is a Lost
Generation of wounded children with no
surviving family and children that have
been stunted that have been
malnutritioned that have been
cognitively uh destroyed essentially by
the Israeli War Machine FID uh Aid
agencies are basically saying that
there's been no trucks into Gaza for for
about a week and that even during the uh
the deal between Hamas and Israel 95
trucks were allowed when in normal times
particularly before the war you 500
commercial and a trucks were allowed
into the strip to deal with the needs of
the people give us a sense of what are
the local and international Aid agencies
doing now when basically they have
nothing to offer to the hundreds of
thousands of people who are so desperate
and anxious about what happens
tomorrow actually um what we're trying
to do as humanitarian workers is um is
limited uh because all of our um uh Aid
is coming from outside of Gaza uh what
we're trying to do is to get basically
uh the most important thing for us is to
try to get uh what we have in the
Egyptian side into Gaza to be able to
organize distributions to people to be
able to serve the people that we work
with and that that as you said are
desperate for support and for help uh
what we're trying to do collectively is
um try to coordinate whatever um small
means we have from previous uh Aid
entries into Gaza and uh to be able to
reach as much as possible but I can
frankly tell you it's nowhere nowhere
near enough um we need an essential um
root uh solution if you want for all of
this uh there is a huge need uh for
immediate release of the aid stuck into
the Egyptian border and before that most
important more important than that there
is a huge need to seize fire to stop all
of that so that we can reach people that
we are unable to reach whether they are
in the north of Gaza on the Gaza City or
in the Border areas um there is a need
also to be able to mobilize the local
market or the local production of food
because that also is a resource that
that's completely cut since day one in
the war Farmers aren't able to reach
their lands aren't able to cultivate is
no enough water there is no enough fuel
to um to operate the bombs and the
equipment they need for the agriculture
so all of the local food production is
almost um reduced to zero so there is a
need to support that and of course we
are trying to raise our voices we are
trying to collectively tell the stories
of The Starving people it's not um a
completely humanitarian story it's a
humanitarian result of of a bigger um
War that's raging against people of Gaza
people are being killed by so many means
one of which is the survation of people
it's been using it's it's been used as a
weon of War since the start and it only
continues so Dona the Israeli government
has a unit the Kat which Le ases with
the United Nations when when it comes to
the um Aid and they say that basically
they're not blocking aid but they're
making sure that the aid is not going to
end up being in the hands of Hamas and
that they also would like to ensure that
the Dual usage material does not enter
into Gaza and can you believe it power
generators crutches field Hospital kits
are considered dual usage material is
this against the
law um the prevention of entry into the
occupied territory by the occupying
power
of the
means for essential requirements for the
civilian population uh that is a breach
of international humanitarian law uh
it's a war crime as I said it's not uh
only since the 7th of October that these
restrictions have been imposed they have
been imposed continuously for the past
16 years they have generally been
increased at times when the violence and
the confrontation as as uh has increased
but those uh
restrictions um
unwarranted have been in place for 16
years and that's why Gaza was already in
a coma situation when the 7th of October
um situation changed with increased
restrictions um so Kat knows perfectly
well um what it should and and should
not be doing um the requests have been
ongoing um the the details about the
terrible consequences for the civilian
populations um are extremely uh clear
so water um medicines food uh cannot be
considered something that is that you
know that can be with withheld from the
civilian population um Israel has the
possibility to check everything that
goes into Gaza um it it is what it has
been doing the fact that is just not
allowing what is required is completely
unacceptable I have many other issues to
discuss with you so I appreciate if you
can give me some short answers the
health system has been completely
decimated when United Nations and
international agencies are saying we
need urgent action to deal with the
health system what do they mean by
that
what they should be meaning is that
there needs to be a ceasefire an
immediate and permanent ceasefire now to
allow hospitals and hospitals be rebuilt
supplies to go back in medical personnel
to come in and help the exhausted Medics
who are being targeted 400 of which have
been whom have been killed and 100 are
still in illegal detention and have been
tortured when they've been uh detained
uh as as you must be aware so what they
mean is that we need supplies we need
an end to the violence is preventing
supplies froming it in and I think
building on Don point it is crucial that
to understand that the US and the UK are
literally sending those arms that are
bombing the hospitals so they are
complicit in this genocide these are war
crimes and that complicity will come
back to haunt them Donatella with the
future of Ona uncertain what kind of
impact if it shuts doors in the future
what kind of impact would that have on
the humanitarian Aid operations in
Gaza well any withdrawal of services um
Health U humanitarian Aid education to
what is actually the majority of the
population in the Gaza Street would have
absolutely disastrous consequences again
I go back to the point that ultimately
um Israel as the occupying power is
legally required to provide all of the
services Israel has not been doing so um
the International Community mostly
through un but also through
International Aid organization has been
doing that uh preventing um preventing
that from from uh continuing to happen
would have absolutely disastrous
consequences um on the on the population
adults and children especially because
as the point was made already uh
children are being impacted uh massively
their their future is being being
destroyed the equivalent of um 10
children a day uh have lost the limb
about 1,000 children have lost limb
since the beginning of the U of of this
crisis so you can imagine you know what
thank you what the requirements are
unfortunately we'll have to leave it
therea Omar ABD man and fidal really
appreciate your time and insight thank
you and thank you too for watching you
can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website al.com for further
discussion go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ AJ Inside Story you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is AJ inside story from me
Hashima and the entire team here in Doha
bye
[Music]
for